# Online-Retail-Customer-Segmentation
It was an unsupervised machine-learning problem. Our goal was to identify major customer segments for a UK-based online retailer selling unique all-occasion gifts using clustering algorithms.

## Problem Statement:
The main objective of this project is to identify major customer segments for a UK-based online retailer selling unique all-occasion gifts. By analyzing a transnational dataset we aim to segment customers into distinct groups based on their purchasing behavior and characteristics. This segmentation will help us better understand their needs and preferences, enabling us to develop targeted marketing strategies that improve customer retention and increase sales.

## File Information
File Description: The dataset contains information related to online retail transactions, including customer details, products, quantities purchased, and transaction dates. The data was collected from Almabetter, and it is in CSV format.

File Location: The dataset file is located at the following path within the project directory: /content/drive/MyDrive/Almabetter/Capstone Projects/Capstone 4/Online Retail.xlsx - Online Retail.csv

Data Loading: To load the dataset into your Python script, you can use the following code:

import pandas as pd

dataset = pd.read_csv('/content/drive/MyDrive/Almabetter/Capstone Projects/Capstone 4/Online Retail.xlsx - Online Retail.csv')

## Dataset Overview:
The dataset consists of 541,909 rows and 8 columns. The columns include Invoice No, Stock Code, Description, Quantity, Invoice Date, Unit Price, Customer ID, and Country. It contains both numerical and categorical data types. We also observed missing values in the Customer ID and Description columns, duplicate values in the dataset, and other data peculiarities.

## Data Wrangling:
To prepare the data for analysis, we conducted several data-wrangling tasks. Firstly, we removed the missing values in the Customer ID and Description columns, we also removed duplicate values to ensure each observation was unique. Additionally, we created new features using the Invoice Date column, including year, month, day, and hour, to allow for more granular analysis over time. Finally, a new feature called TotalAmount was created by multiplying the Quantity and UnitPrice columns to capture the total revenue generated by each transaction.

## Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA):
During exploratory data analysis (EDA), we made interesting discoveries. We found that total sales had grown significantly from 2010 to 2011, indicating business growth. Sales peaked during November and December, suggesting higher demand during the holiday season. We also observed that Thursdays had the highest sales, while Sundays had the lowest. Most of our customers were from the United Kingdom, with substantial numbers from Germany, France, EIRE, Spain, etc.

## Data Pre-processing and Feature Engineering:
To enhance the data for clustering analysis, we performed data pre-processing and feature engineering steps. This involved removing irrelevant features related to transaction details and focusing on more relevant features Recency, Frequency, and Monetary. We also applied outlier treatment techniques using the interquartile range (IQR) method and conducted data transformations, including logarithmic transformations, to normalize the data and reduce the impact of outliers. Finally, we used data scaling techniques, such as standard scaling, to bring different features to a common scale.

## Machine Learning Models:
 We implemented two machine learning models for customer segmentation: K-Means clustering and Hierarchical clustering.

### K-Means Clustering:
First, we used the K-Means clustering algorithm. We determined the optimal number of clusters using the elbow curve method and evaluated the model's performance using metrics such as silhouette score, Davies-Bouldin index, and Calinski-Harabasz index. We performed cross-validation and hyperparameter tuning using GridSearchCV to find the best combination of hyperparameters. These parameters helped achieve effective clustering of the customer data.

### Hierarchical Clustering:
Next, we employed hierarchical clustering, which groups data into hierarchical structures based on similarities. We again performed cross-validation and hyperparameter tuning using GridSearchCV to find the optimal combination of hyperparameters.We evaluated the model's performance using metrics similar to the K-Means model.

## Evaluation and Model Selection:
Based on the evaluation metrics, the hyperparameter-tuned K-Means model with five clusters emerged as the optimal choice for customer segmentation. Although the Hierarchical Clustering model with two clusters had a higher silhouette score, the hyperparameter-tuned model demonstrated better visual separation of customer groups, aligning with our business objective of wide customer segmentation.

## Feature Importance:
To determine feature importance, we employed SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) analysis. SHAP assigns importance values to different features based on game theory principles. Our analysis revealed that Recency had the strongest impact on the model's predictions, followed by Frequency and Monetary.

## Conclusion:
In conclusion, the project "Online Retail Customer Segmentation" successfully employed unsupervised machine learning techniques to identify distinct customer segments and gain valuable insights into customer behavior. The hyperparameter-tuned K-Means model with five clusters emerged as the optimal choice for customer segmentation, providing a comprehensive understanding of customer preferences and enabling targeted marketing strategies. The insights derived from our analysis can be utilized to enhance customer retention, optimize pricing, and improve inventory management, thereby positively impacting business outcomes.
